We're gonna talk about Gatsby today and
we're gonna dig into some of
the more advanced use cases of it.
This is something that I think
it's really interesting there's so
much you can do with Gatsby beyond
what the initial impressions are.
I think when you first look at Gatsby
if you just went to the intro to Gatsby
course that I did a couple days ago.
You may have kinda gotten
the impression that Gatsby reserved for
building static sites.
It's a really good tool for that,
you can load data from anywhere,
you can put it up on the internet.
And it all happens very fast, but
Gatsby can do a lot more than that.
And today we're gonna dig into
what the opportunities are,
what the additional things we can do
are with Gatsby that let us go more
toward the app side of the spectrum.
And take advantage of some
of these dynamic things and
do some pretty powerful stuff.
So first, let's go ahead and
go through just some basics,
I'm gonna show a few slides here.
If you've seen the intro to Gatsby
workshop, this is gonna look familiar but
it's good to recap.
So let's start by saying who I am,
so I am Jason Lengstorf.
I'm the VP of developer
experience at Netlify.
I'm also the host of a show
called learning with Jason
which runs on Twitch I pair
program with people, and
we learned something new
together a couple times a week.
I used to be on the Gatsby team.
I am now over at Netlify as I said,
but while I was at Gatsby got to see
a lot of cool things work
with a lot of amazing people.
And I'm also a booth enthusiast I really
like being goofy on the internet.
I like corgis, I like boots on the nose.
I like making websites about
whooping corgis on the nose.
It's all really just
right here in my heart.
So, let's start with saying
what the heck is Gatsby?
So, Gatsby is two things.
If you start googling Gatsby,
it can get a little bit confusing.
And that is because Gatsby,
is the name of both an open source
framework and
a venture backed cloud company, right.
And they are connected but
they're not the same.
And so
that can get a little bit confusing,
it can be a little hard to
understand what's going on.
So for the purposes of this workshop,
we are only going to talk
about Gatsby the framework.
We are not going to talk
about Gatsby cloud.
So that helps it at least in the context
of this, we are going to restrict
all of our discussion around
the open source framework only.
None of the features that we're using
today are restricted to Gatsby cloud,
nothing requires you to have
a Gatsby cloud account.
This is all open source,
you can do whatever you want with it.
So what Gatsby is, it's a static
site generator but as I said,
it can do a little bit more than that, its
primary thing is taking in data running
a build step and outputting static files.
This is known as the jam
stack architecture.
And what that means is, you decouple your
front end, because by putting them into
static files you're able to ship that
to a CDN it's not reliant on a server.
It can be completely decoupled from
any API's microservices backends that
you have.
It is also then precompiled,
which is that build step.
And that pre compilation helps
cut down on resource usage.
If you know that a page is always gonna
look the same no matter who looks at it.
Building that page ahead of time,
cuts down on the server resources required
to make that available to the internet.
You have the ability to put it
up on a CDN, CDNs are cheap,
they're very performant,
they are scalable, they're secure.
It's pretty hard to take down a CDN and
so in the grand scheme of things.
If you've got a file
that you can make static,
putting it as a static file on a CDN
is probably one of the easiest ways,
to hit that kind of enterprise grade
of uptime and availability and scale.
Gatsby is also built on react, so react is
a Facebook framework that gives us a lot
of ability to modify the UI quickly
through pretty thoughtful API's.
It's a great way to handle user
interactivity, and stateful things across
UI's where you can kind of have a button
over here change some state over here.
Things that are getting
easier with native web API's.
But especially when react
first came to prominence,
they weren't easy it
was pretty challenging.
Gatsby's also all in on graphql.
All-in on graphql is a data layer
that allows for us to query for
arbitrary nested data,
you can start by looking at one object and
then look at the related objects.
So if you've ever used rest, you would hit
an endpoint for let's say, your blog post.
So slash API slash posts.
That's gonna come back
with a list of blogs.
And then if you have comments,
it would give you an array of comment IDs.
And then you would have to go and
make a query for
each one of those comments
if you wanted to show them.
Which means that you're making tens or
even hundreds of rest calls,
to load one blogs worth of posts and
comments.
That can be really challenging.
What graphql does instead is it abstracts
all that away into a kind of a centralized
layer, where you're able to say I want my
blog and I also want all the comments, and
let me get the comment
author in the comment text.
And graphql will bring
all that data together.
And let us make one request to the graphql
endpoint then that brings us back
all that data.
So it's, really, really good when you're
dealing with loosely structured data.
If you're doing data in your site,
that will be related to itself,
kinda spread all over the place.
Sometimes you'll need
like a subsection and
maybe you'll need something much
broader and all over the place.
Graphql is a great way to solve that.
And when you're dealing with building
websites, especially websites that pull in
data from all around the web,
which is how the jam stack works.
You might be pulling from a rest API,
multiple headless services maybe you've
got a headless CMS for your blog.
Maybe you've got a headless E commerce
system like you're using shopify to manage
your products.
Maybe you're pulling in comments
from a third party system as well.
Maybe you've got a custom back end,
that has an API for some of your own data,
all of that gets stitched
together in the jam stack layer.
And having this graphql layer to bring
those together and create relationships
between them, is really powerful
gives you a lot of flexibility.
So that's why Gatsby went all in on it.
It's a really good use case for
building websites.
Gatsby's also opinionated,
it wants you to do things a certain way.
It's gonna give you very clear APIs, it's
got a lot of things that are done for you.
But in order to get those benefits,
you have to be willing to
work with the platform.
I have watched a lot of people make
themselves really sad by trying to
disagree with Gatsby's opinions.
And then they'll dive into the babble
configure the Web pack config to
change it.
And it just leads to sadness, right?
So Gatsby is an opinionated tool,
you get a lot for
agreeing to follow the conventions
that Gatsby provides.
If you find yourself constantly
fighting against what Gatsby does.
You may wanna consider another framework,
because the benefit of an opinionated
framework is what's done for you.
If you are spending most of your effort,
arguing with your framework,
you've probably chosen
the wrong framework.
Gatsby is perf conscious, so
one of the core benefits of Gatsby,
outside of just when you build things
to static files and put them on a CDN,
you're automatically gonna get a perf
benefit because the site loads faster.
There's less data to load,
you don't have to keep servers running.
So you don't have to manage data,
round trips or scaling up servers,
making them globally available.
So you just inherently faster,
Gatsby also does a bunch of things like
pre loading assets in the background.
It will optimize your images,
it will do some baseline compression and
tree shaking.
And all the things that you want it to
do to make sure that your bundles are as
small as they can be,
that they're compressed properly,
that they're only loaded when
they're actually needed.
But the browser is able to start
pre-loading them a little bit so
that they feel even faster.
And finally Gatsby's convenient,
that's its biggest value prop,
is that if you use Gatsby,
you get to go very far very fast,
because of the way that it's set up to
just let you hit the ground running.
It has huge ecosystem, a ton of plugins,
a ton of third party sources
already integrated with it.
And that means that you as a creator,
don't need to argue with your framework or
set up this boilerplate or
build the foundational stuff.
You can just build
the thing you wanna build.
And that makes it a great choice for
if you're trying to stand
up a marketing site.
If you're trying to get a blog rolling,
if you wanna be a content creator and
you're trying to get up and running.
Don't spend all your time
fine tuning your website,
just start publishing just
get things out there.
Start that muscle of
being a content creator.
It's also great for
agencies for that reason.
There's just a lot of reasons
why Gatsby is a good like, hey,
we need to move fast Gatsby
who's probably a good choice.
So specifically,
what we're gonna cover today is a whole
bunch of Gatsby's more advanced features.
So if you're interested
in the basics of Gatsby,
how to make pages ,how
to set up a project.
We're not gonna cover that today
,that's gonna be in the intro to Gatsby
workshop which you can watch
on the front and master site.
What we're gonna cover today, is we're
gonna be using a monorepo for a dev setup.
So in a lot of bigger companies
I've seen they use monorepos.
And especially if you're gonna
start building your custom plugins,
custom themes, things like that.
Having a monorepos gonna
make dev a whole lot easier.
So we're gonna talk about how to do
that and what's the benefits are.
We're gonna set up custom pages.
So not just building a page
in the pages directory, but
actually getting into
the Gatsby node API's and
creating pages using those node API's with
custom context and all those good things.
We're gonna look at custom data types.
How do you get data into
the Gatsby graphql layer,
and not using a source plug in.
But actually building your own using
the node API is dropping data in.
We're gonna look at custom
data relationships.
So after you've created data, how can we
make it possible to do the nesting and
the arbitrary queries.
We're gonna look at custom resolvers.
If we have some data and
we wanna get a derived field,
we can build right into
Gatsby's graphql layer.
So we're gonna look at how to do that.
You can do remote image handling,
if you've got that listen image that's
available on say on splash or,
whatever service had the images before.
You can have Gatsby pulled out locally and
do optimization for you,
we'll look at how to do that.
We're gonna do theme development.
So we're gonna build a theme that can
be shared between sites, reusable code,
this is really good especially if
you are in the agency space or
if you work with clients where you
need some kind of basic boilerplate,
things that are always more or
less the same.
So that you don't have to do
the same general setup for
everyone in your clients.
We're gonna look at client only route.
So if you wanna build something
that shouldn't be server rendered.
Let's say you've got an account page or
you're doing a surge where some kind
of user interaction is required before
you know what you're gonna
display on the page.
We're going to look at that.
We're also gonna look at
server less functions.
So when you are working with a client
only site, you can do a lot but
there are moments where you find
yourself wanting a node server or
some kind of a back end.
Serverless functions are often
a way to very quickly stand up
that little bit of back end
functionality you need,
without the headache of actually
standing up and scaling a server.
Building a little bit of functionality
is fine, I love doing that as a dev.
Building out a whole node server and
figuring out how to get it into a docker
container and then figuring out how
to get that deployed in a way that scales
means now I'm writing Kubernetes config.
There's a lot to that I don't wanna do it,
I would love to never
think about it again.
And serverless functions make that,
generally speaking,
I can almost always solve my
problems with a serverless function
instead of having to actually
stand up a whole note service.
We're gonna set up protected routes.
So we're not gonna do
actual authentication,
we're not going to deal with usernames and
passwords.
But we are gonna show how if you
do have someone authenticated,
if you've used a service like auth 0 or
you've used Netlify identity or
some other thing that gives you a token or
logged in status.
Will show you how to make sure
the Gatsby only shows pages
to people who are logged in that way.
We're gonna look at deployment, how do
you get this thing up on the internet?
And especially when you're talking
about monorepo development,
there's a little bit to that.
So we wanna make sure that
we've got a good flow there.
We're gonna do environment variables.
Environment variables are a really good
way when you're working with third party
services, you're gonna
have public keys for
how you integrate with
somebody's JavaScript SDK.
Or private keys so that you can get
access to data that shouldn't be publicly
available on the web, so
that you can pull out a subset of it for
display on the website.
Those workflows are little
head bendy at first.
So if you've never worked
with environment variables,
this will be a good kind of look at what
Gatsby does with environment variables.
And how we can make sure that only
the public ones should be available
to the website, and everything else should
be restricted to the builds process and
serverless functions